README.md, before:

# diesel-derive-enum
[![crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/diesel-derive-enum.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/diesel-derive-enum)
![Build Status](https://github.com/adwhit/diesel-derive-enum/workflows/CI/badge.svg)

Use Rust enums directly with [`diesel`](https://github.com/diesel-rs/diesel) ORM.

The latest release, `1.1.1`, is tested against `diesel 1.4` and `rustc 1.39.0`. It _may_ work with older versions.

*Note:* The current master branch tracks `diesel` master, and will **not** work with `diesel 1.x`.

### Example usage:

#### Cargo.toml
```toml
[dependencies]
diesel-derive-enum = { version = "1", features = ["..."] } # "postgres", "mysql" or "sqlite"
```

#### Rust
```rust
// define your enum
#[derive(DbEnum)]
pub enum MyEnum {
    Foo,  // All variants must be fieldless
    Bar,
    BazQuxx,
}

// define your table
table! {
    use diesel::types::Integer;
    use super::MyEnumMapping;
    my_table {
        id -> Integer,
        some_enum -> MyEnumMapping, // Generated Diesel type - see below for explanation
    }
}

// define a struct with which to populate/query the table
#[derive(Insertable, Queryable, Identifiable, Debug, PartialEq)]
#[table_name = "my_table"]
struct  MyRow {
    id: i32,
    some_enum: MyEnum,
}
```

#### SQL

Postgres:
```sql
-- by default the postgres ENUM values correspond to snake_cased Rust enum variant names
CREATE TYPE my_enum AS ENUM ('foo', 'bar', 'baz_quxx');

CREATE TABLE my_table (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  some_enum my_enum NOT NULL
);
```
MySQL:
```sql
CREATE TABLE my_table (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    my_enum enum('foo', 'bar', 'baz_quxx') NOT NULL  -- note: snake_case
);
```
sqlite:
```sql
CREATE TABLE my_table (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    my_enum TEXT CHECK(my_enum IN ('foo', 'bar', 'baz_quxx')) NOT NULL   -- note: snake_case
);
```

Now we can insert and retrieve MyEnum directly:

```rust
let data = vec![
    MyRow {
        id: 1,
        some_enum: MyEnum::Foo,
    },
    MyRow {
        id: 2,
        some_enum: MyEnum::BazQuxx,
    },
];
let connection = PgConnection::establish(/*...*/).unwrap();
let inserted = insert_into(my_table::table)
    .values(&data)
    .get_results(&connection)
    .unwrap();
assert_eq!(data, inserted);
```

Postgres arrays work too! See [this example.](tests/src/pg_array.rs)

### Enums Explained

Enums work slightly differently in each of the three databases.
* In Postgres, one declares an enum as a separate type within a schema, which may then
  be used in multiple tables. Internally, an enum value is encoded as an int (four bytes)
  and stored inline within a row - a much more efficient representation than a string.
* MySQL is similar except the enum is not declared as a separate type and is 'local' to
  it's parent table. It is encoded as either one or two bytes.
* sqlite does not have enums - in fact, it does [not really have types](https://dba.stackexchange.com/questions/106364/text-string-stored-in-sqlite-integer-column);
  you can store any kind of data in any column. Instead we emulate static checking by
  adding the `CHECK` command, as per above. This does not give a more compact encoding
  but does ensure data integrity. Note that if you somehow retreive some other invalid
  text as an enum, `diesel` will error at the point of deserialization.

### Type Names

Diesel maintains a set of internal types which correspond one-to-one to the types available in various
relational databases. Each internal type in turn maps to some kind of Rust native type.
e.g. Postgres `INTEGER` maps to `diesel::types::Integer` maps to `i32`. Therefore when we create a new enum in Postgres
with `CREATE TYPE ...`, we must also create a corresponding type in Diesel, then map it to
some native Rust type (our enum). That is the purpose of this crate.

If you are getting compilation errors, it could be that these three types names are not 'in sync'.
By default, the database and Diesel internal types are inferred from the name of the Rust enum.
Specifically, we assume `MyEnum` corresponds to `my_enum` in your database schema and `MyEnumMapping` in Diesel.

These defaults can be overridden with the attributes `#[PgType = "..."]` and `#[DieselType = "..."]`.
(The `PgType` annotation has no effect on `MySQL` or `sqlite`).

Similarly, by default we assume that the possible ENUM variants are simply the Rust enum variants
translated to `snake_case`.  These can be renamed with the inline annotation `#[db_rename = "..."]`.

See [this test](tests/src/rename.rs) for an example of renaming.

You can override the `snake_case` assumption for the entire enum using the `#[DbValueStyle = "..."]` attribute.  Individual variants can still be renamed using `#[db_rename = "..."]`.

| DbValueStyle   | Variant | Value   |
|:-------------------:|:---------:|:---|
| camelCase | BazQuxx | "bazQuxx" |
| kebab-case | BazQuxx | "baz-quxx" |
| PascalCase | BazQuxx | "BazQuxx" |
| SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE | BazQuxx | "BAZ_QUXX" |
| snake_case | BazQuxx | "baz_quxx" |
| verbatim | Baz__quxx | "Baz__quxx" |

See [this test](tests/src/value_style.rs) for an example of changing the output style.

#### `print-schema` and `infer-schema!`

The `print-schema` command (from `diesel_cli`) attempts to connect to an existing DB and generate
a correct mapping of Postgres columns to Diesel internal types. If a custom ENUM exists in the
database, Diesel will simply assume that the internal mapping type is the ENUM name,
Title-cased (e.g. `my_enum` -> `My_enum`). Therefore the derived mapping name must also
be corrected with the `DieselType` attribute e.g. `#[DieselType = "My_enum"]`.

If you are using a `diesel.toml` file to generate your `schema.rs` file, you should be sure to
add an extra import for the enum mapping type, i.e. it should look something like the following:

``` toml
# In diesel.toml

[print_schema]
file = "src/schema.rs"
import_types = ["diesel::sql_types::*", "crate::my_enum::*"]   # <- note the extra import
```

Unfortunately the `infer_schema!` is not compatible with this crate.

### License

Licensed under either of these:

 * Apache License, Version 2.0, ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
   https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
 * MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or
   https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Commit message:

Add attribute to specify postgres schema + docs

README.md, after:

# diesel-derive-enum
[![crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/diesel-derive-enum.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/diesel-derive-enum)
![Build Status](https://github.com/adwhit/diesel-derive-enum/workflows/CI/badge.svg)

Use Rust enums directly with [`diesel`](https://github.com/diesel-rs/diesel) ORM.

The latest release, `1.1.1`, is tested against `diesel 1.4` and `rustc 1.39.0`. It _may_ work with older versions.

*Note:* The current master branch tracks `diesel` master, and will **not** work with `diesel 1.x`.

### Example usage:

#### Cargo.toml
```toml
[dependencies]
diesel-derive-enum = { version = "1", features = ["..."] } # "postgres", "mysql" or "sqlite"
```

#### Rust
```rust
// define your enum
#[derive(DbEnum)]
pub enum MyEnum {
    Foo,  // All variants must be fieldless
    Bar,
    BazQuxx,
}

// define your table
table! {
    use diesel::types::Integer;
    use super::MyEnumMapping;
    my_table {
        id -> Integer,
        some_enum -> MyEnumMapping, // Generated Diesel type - see below for explanation
    }
}

// define a struct with which to populate/query the table
#[derive(Insertable, Queryable, Identifiable, Debug, PartialEq)]
#[table_name = "my_table"]
struct  MyRow {
    id: i32,
    some_enum: MyEnum,
}
```

#### SQL

Postgres:
```sql
-- by default the postgres ENUM values correspond to snake_cased Rust enum variant names
CREATE TYPE my_enum AS ENUM ('foo', 'bar', 'baz_quxx');

CREATE TABLE my_table (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  some_enum my_enum NOT NULL
);
```
MySQL:
```sql
CREATE TABLE my_table (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    my_enum enum('foo', 'bar', 'baz_quxx') NOT NULL  -- note: snake_case
);
```
sqlite:
```sql
CREATE TABLE my_table (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    my_enum TEXT CHECK(my_enum IN ('foo', 'bar', 'baz_quxx')) NOT NULL   -- note: snake_case
);
```

Now we can insert and retrieve MyEnum directly:

```rust
let data = vec![
    MyRow {
        id: 1,
        some_enum: MyEnum::Foo,
    },
    MyRow {
        id: 2,
        some_enum: MyEnum::BazQuxx,
    },
];
let connection = PgConnection::establish(/*...*/).unwrap();
let inserted = insert_into(my_table::table)
    .values(&data)
    .get_results(&connection)
    .unwrap();
assert_eq!(data, inserted);
```

Postgres arrays work too! See [this example.](tests/src/pg_array.rs)

### Enums Explained

Enums work slightly differently in each of the three databases.
* In Postgres, one declares an enum as a separate type within a schema, which may then
  be used in multiple tables. Internally, an enum value is encoded as an int (four bytes)
  and stored inline within a row - a much more efficient representation than a string.
* MySQL is similar except the enum is not declared as a separate type and is 'local' to
  it's parent table. It is encoded as either one or two bytes.
* sqlite does not have enums - in fact, it does [not really have types](https://dba.stackexchange.com/questions/106364/text-string-stored-in-sqlite-integer-column);
  you can store any kind of data in any column. Instead we emulate static checking by
  adding the `CHECK` command, as per above. This does not give a more compact encoding
  but does ensure data integrity. Note that if you somehow retreive some other invalid
  text as an enum, `diesel` will error at the point of deserialization.

### Type Names

Diesel maintains a set of internal types which correspond one-to-one to the types available in various
relational databases. Each internal type in turn maps to some kind of Rust native type.
e.g. Postgres `INTEGER` maps to `diesel::types::Integer` maps to `i32`. Therefore when we create a new enum in Postgres
with `CREATE TYPE ...`, we must also create a corresponding type in Diesel, then map it to
some native Rust type (our enum). That is the purpose of this crate.

If you are getting compilation errors, it could be that these three types names are not 'in sync'.
By default, the database and Diesel internal types are inferred from the name of the Rust enum.
Specifically, we assume `MyEnum` corresponds to `my_enum` in your database schema and `MyEnumMapping` in Diesel.

These defaults can be overridden with the attributes `#[PgType = "..."]` and `#[DieselType = "..."]`.
(The `PgType` annotation has no effect on `MySQL` or `sqlite`).

Similarly, by default we assume that the possible ENUM variants are simply the Rust enum variants
translated to `snake_case`.  These can be renamed with the inline annotation `#[db_rename = "..."]`.

See [this test](tests/src/rename.rs) for an example of renaming.

See [this test](tests/src/schema.rs) for an example of specifying a schema.

You can override the `snake_case` assumption for the entire enum using the `#[DbValueStyle = "..."]` attribute.  Individual variants can still be renamed using `#[db_rename = "..."]`.

| DbValueStyle   | Variant | Value   |
|:-------------------:|:---------:|:---|
| camelCase | BazQuxx | "bazQuxx" |
| kebab-case | BazQuxx | "baz-quxx" |
| PascalCase | BazQuxx | "BazQuxx" |
| SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE | BazQuxx | "BAZ_QUXX" |
| snake_case | BazQuxx | "baz_quxx" |
| verbatim | Baz__quxx | "Baz__quxx" |

See [this test](tests/src/value_style.rs) for an example of changing the output style.

#### `print-schema` and `infer-schema!`

The `print-schema` command (from `diesel_cli`) attempts to connect to an existing DB and generate
a correct mapping of Postgres columns to Diesel internal types. If a custom ENUM exists in the
database, Diesel will simply assume that the internal mapping type is the ENUM name,
Title-cased (e.g. `my_enum` -> `My_enum`). Therefore the derived mapping name must also
be corrected with the `DieselType` attribute e.g. `#[DieselType = "My_enum"]`.

If you are using a `diesel.toml` file to generate your `schema.rs` file, you should be sure to
add an extra import for the enum mapping type, i.e. it should look something like the following:

``` toml
# In diesel.toml

[print_schema]
file = "src/schema.rs"
import_types = ["diesel::sql_types::*", "crate::my_enum::*"]   # <- note the extra import
```

Unfortunately the `infer_schema!` is not compatible with this crate.

### License

Licensed under either of these:

 * Apache License, Version 2.0, ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
   https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
 * MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or
   https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
